
R.A.Israel Jebasingh, AIR -59 in CSE 2004. IAS officer in West Bengal.Mentor for future IAS.
Written 9 Oct 2015
Writing skills can be improved only over a period of time .Because writing skill denotes the ability to communicate clearly ,use the appropriate words, and comprehend properly.This happens only through Practise .Hence ,i suggest you to practise answer writing and get it evaluated .


However here are few tips I generally give to my students on answer writing .

It is about what you write and how you write .This can be mastered in a day or two ,may take a weeks time for few and a months time for few .

Tip 1. Answer the question completely. Read the question twice to understand ,what all is asked.

Foreign direct investment in the defence sector is now said to be liberalized. What influence this is expected to have on Indian defence and economy in the short and long run?
                                                                                        (GS Paper 3,2014)
In this question ,you have to answer two parts -
a)Impact of FDI in defence .
b)Impact on economy .
Also ,in both the parts ,you should write about "short run" and "long run" perspective.

Tip 2. Understand what is exactly asked .Do not write whatever you know in the topic without understanding what is asked.
While we flaunt India’s demographic dividend, we ignore the dropping rates of employability. What are we missing while doing so? Where will the jobs that India desperately needs come from? Explain.
                                                                                        (GS Paper 3,2014)
The moment you see "demographic dividend",do not start writing about it . Read the question again. The question is refering to the unemployability of the demographic dividend. Thereby refering to skill development of the demographic dividend. Now connect the two and write your answer.
Also ,dont miss the second part of the question on "where will the jobs come from".

Tip3.Use key words and phrases
Though the federal principle is dominant in our Constitution and that principle is one of its basic features, but it is equally true that federalism under the Indian Constitution leans in favour of a strong Centre, a feature that militates against the concept of strong federalism. Discuss.
                                                                                         (GS Paper 2,2014)
 Use key words related to the question like  cooperative federalism,bargaining federalism,etc.This will add weight to your answer.

Tip 4. Manage your time for each answer properly.
Every paper of GS requires you to answer 20/25 questions. Hence , do not spend too much time on one particular answer because you know it too well /you are not able to generate points .And dont spend time too much time to write introduction /conclusion in the GS papers.

Tip 5.Present the answer well .
Keep this in mind .An examiner has to evaluate a lot of sheets along with yours,on a single day . How will you make the examiner feel your answer is better ? How will you make it easy for him to give you marks ?

Its possible when you write legibly,make use of charts/diagrams/subheadings/maps .

Donot write at a stretch.Break into paragraphs/ subheadings /bullet points .Follow according to the needs of the question.

Tip 6. Use relevant facts/data to substantiate your answer.

Instances of President’s delay in commuting death sentences has come under public debate as denial of justice. Should there be a time limit specified for the President to accept/reject such petitions? Analyse.
                                                                                         (GS Paper 2,2014)
 To substantiate your argument in the above answer, you should quote instances of Supreme Court ruling ,Bhullar case ,Constitutional provisions on death penalty,etc .This will give more validity to the answer.

Tip7. Practise Answer writing.
Practise .Practise .Practise .Thats the only way !
Take up mock tests and monitor your performance .

Good luck !

Reference :
http://officersiasacademy.blogsp...

Other answers you would wish to check out -
Expected cutoff for 2015 prelims.
What are the different subjects in IAS exam ? What is the pattern ?
What were the cutoffs for Prelims ,Mains and Final in 2013 &2014 ?
Prelims Syllabus
UPSC Mains syllabus
How to prepare for prelims ?
How to read 'The Hindu '?
How to prepare GS paper 1 for mains ?

Here is the list of blogs ,on my experience as an IAS officer:

Bharat Darshan - the dream of every IAS aspirant.
One night at Flood Centre
My experience with a toothache
19.6k Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by Himanshu Gaurav
Related QuestionsMore Answers Below

How do I improve my writing skill for the UPSC mains?
What are some courses one can do to improve answer and writing skills for the UPSC Mains?
How can I improve my vocabulary and writing skills for UPSC?
Why is it a good habit to maintain a daily journal?
What's the best way to improve hand writing?
Agam Jain
Agam Jain, Indian Police Service
Updated 5d ago
I used to write on websites everyday but still wasn't getting desired results even up till few days before he mains. Then one day I sat and made this following small list (these are small points but will help if you have already started writing and want an improvement)-

Answer writing:

Write answers more than once if initial one is badly structured.
Don’t think about time, try to create a structure before writing.
Less of the intro and conclusion, but both should be better.
More of the content.
Continuity- points coverage in chronological manner
In better divisions
In prioritised manner
Write more and effective.
Try to include new points and words/sentences/phrases.
Improve handwriting.
From the next day, I kept it in mind and wrote the answers.

And remember one thing- the day when you will have enough material that you have to cut the info to keep the answer precise, you are on right track. Otherwise people try to use phrases and words to beautify their answers if they don't have the matter. This trick could work, but not always.
21.4k Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by Prasoon Dev Sharma
Sanjay Nandan
Sanjay Nandan, IAS.Friend, Counsellor and Mentor. With you on your journey to success.
Updated 28 Aug 2014
Krishna, this is precisely where the problem lies you wish To improve your  answer writing skills without realising that you need to improve the writing skills and ability to express clearly, cogently in your own words. How can you have good answer writing skills when we never get the opportunity of having command over written words i.e. writing skill. For example before trying to win an obstacle race you have to learn to run as well as to jump over the obstacles.

Alas! that is a skill which our education system destroys rather than create. Our rote memory based examination system  forces teachers to spoon feed the students answers to the expected questions. If this was not enough we have a huge publishing industry which brings out guess papers and model answers. Ideally this has to develop all along your childhood but we are singularly unfortunate that we are forced to develop only one skill memorise the model answers. In this process we never learn the basic skills of comprehension even what to speak about skills of oratory and penmanship. Skills which demand first the ability to understand what is asked and later on bringing together the relevant facts and arguments. These have to be developed into a cogent, persuasive and balanced answer with the following three components. An interesting introduction then logical development of the topic with a final impressive conclusion.

What is the way out ? How do we become proficient in writing? I have already answered these topics in my several blogs and the summary is 3Ps practice,practice and more practice. 

What has been destroyed over 16 years of education will require sustained efforts. You have to practice writing skills daily. As a baby cannot start running all of a sudden and it has to go through the process of crawling, walking and finally running. Similarly you will have to go step by step starting with tiny ones.

My suggestion is to try and achieve synergy in reading, note taking and writing. 
To start you should try to read few paragraphs of a book  noting down the key words.
Then pause and go through the keywords.
Write down your notes in your own words using the key words. Here comes the crucial question of the language.  Your reference material might be in English or the language chosen by you. Still your notes and practice answers have to be in the language chosen by you for the UPSC exams.
You may start by writing a single sentence only. Once you are able to write good sentence in your own words  perhaps after few weeks you may  start with single paragraphs . Do not forget the ingredients  an interesting introduction in a sentence  then logical development of the topic as the main body  with a final impressive concluding sentence.
Then after few months of well written paras   build up into a set of interlinked paragraphs that is an essay. Remember this three part format an interesting introduction in a sentence or short para then logical interconnected development of the topic in several paras as the main body finishing   with a final impressive concluding short para or sentence.
Once you are able to write essays you should start with previous year IAS questions. Start with short answer ones going on to longer ones. Remember this three part format an interesting introduction in a sentence  then logical development of the topic as the main body  with a final impressive concluding sentence.
After you have finished writing revise them and edit them. This in my opinion is the most important step. Periodically revisit your earlier answers and add/ delete and edit them.
All the best. I will try to guide the aspirants if I receive their question and answer. I will suggest ways to improve your answers.

I suggest that you read my blogs and esp. the following posts/blogs:
1. Steps towards IAS by Sanjay Nandan on IAS Preliminary Exams
2. Learning Resources for the IAS Exams. by Sanjay Nandan on For IAS aspirants
3. How do I select an optional paper for UPSC?
4. For IAS aspirants
5. IAS Preliminary Exams
6. Choosing a Career
45.9k Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by Krishna G Kulkarni
Muhammed Farzeen
Muhammed Farzeen, Observer...
Written 20 Nov 2015
Thanks Shankar Anand for A2A.

If you are serious about getting a top rank,it's better you start writing earnestly. Don't wait for an auspicious day, or for a day when you think you can write better.
Remember-Perfection is actually an illusion.

Even if you have never wrote anything in your life, start writing now.you learn faltering.you can't drive in fourth gear straight away.start with an ugly answer.let it ridiculous.but do start    

UPSC doesn't expect a candidate to acquire extraordinary writing skills in English; it just wants candidates who are able to communicate their knowledge in a simple way so that everybody understands the message clearly.

But How?
Practice,Practice,Practice.Every day.only through practicing answer writing every day.two important factors decided the out come of your answer: one understanding the question completely.second,sticking word limit.

Don't worry how less you have wrote till now.Yow must start writing now. just take a pen and write an answer. Do it for 2 hours.your writing skill will be back,try it if you are serious  about getting a rank. it's just a starting problem,or a 'restarting' problem.wake up now and start.

"Finally, if you want to write,you have to just shut up,pick p a pen,and do it. I'm sorry there are no excuses.this is our life.step forward.may be it's only for ten minutes.that's okay. to write feels better than all the excuses" -Natalie Goldberg    

I hope I am clear enough.
All the Best!
And if you want a comprehensive solution for your preparation, follow these people and ask to your doubts 
Sandeep Manudhane
Roman Saini
Bhavesh Mishra
Atul Kulkarni
Rishav Gupta
Sanjay Nandan
Satish Kumar Dogra
R.A.Israel Jebasingh
Akand Sitra
Nitish Suri
4.2k Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by Shankar Anand
Rohit Shinde
Rohit Shinde, Google Summer of Code, 2015
Written 28 Aug 2014
Sanjay sir has given some good pointers on how to approach answer writing in Mains, I would like to add some more points.

Check which domain the question belongs to. Is it agriculture, women empowerment, some scheme or some historical movement? Then write a basic introduction to that topic in not more than 30-40 words.
For example, take the following question.
Critically examine the following statement: "Indian agriculture is rainfed agriculture."
Here, you would start with describing the basics of agriculture. Then you would go on to describe why it is rain fed.
Once you write the introduction, you must now come to the body of the answer. Ask yourself, why is Indian agriculture rainfed. On brainstorming, you will think of some points.
Low rainfall leads to drought, drought leads to famine, famine leads to economic distress, etc. Just a few minutes of brainstorming can you give a lot of material.
Once you have got the material, you need to write it down. Initially, write it however you think or in whatever order it comes to mind. Once you have written the answer, read it again and see how you can improve it.
Continue this process regularly and you will see visible improvements.
11.1k Views · View Upvotes
Avni Upalabdhee
Avni Upalabdhee, works at Doing Righteous Karma Is My Job
Written 24 Nov 2016
You have to follow all the points that people have followed till now for improvement in writing skills, just in a more intensified method.

IF YOUR BASE IS WEAK-

Grammar books No matter how professional you are, one always makes grammatical mistakes in one way or the other. So, it is best to curl up with your wren and martins book of school and practice. :) I understand that as an UPSC aspirant, you have many other things on your plate, so I suggest you to solve grammar books while travelling or IF POSSIBLE, then cutting your spree time.

Reading books Now, for a UPSC aspirant, reading books does not mean to curl up with Fault in Our Stars! (although you can, I am nobody to tell you what to do and what not to)Read books like Rich Dad Poor Dad, Under the Skin of a Jihadist, PARAG KHANNA BOOKS (very important for to-be diplomats if you did not know :) ) or other novels related with the thesis of the country. (You will be better at knowing which books!) keep a dictionary handy, otherwise it is of no use. Absorb the matter you have read, read it twice or thrice in YOUR OWN COMFORT ZONE.

IF YOUR BASE IS STRONG

1 Plan the structure of your answer. Plan the first lines of your introduction, body and conclusion. Though it may not sound vital, you must write important points in rough to avoid scrubbing.

2 Don’t try to over-exaggerate. If you feel difficult to do so, then your base is weak. I’d request you to read stuff under IF YOUR BASE IS WEAK.

3 Use words suitable for the context, i.e. jargon words. READ THE BOOK “THE COMPLETE PLAIN WORDS” especially written for how to use jargon words for people associated with law and stuff, it is superb. A simple example, You may write “rain is dancing” in your English paper but not in your Geography paper.

4 I am sure, you read newspapers daily as a UPSC aspirant, I don’t need to tell ya this xD.
1.1k Views · View Upvotes
Varsha Singh
Varsha Singh, Aspiring Bureaucrat !!
Written 27 Aug 2014
Follow Akand and his posts, you will get to know how to do it yourself :)

And for daily writing practice follow Insights Daily Writing Challenges :) 

Insights UPSC Civil Services IAS Exam Preparation Guide

Akand Sitra post on Insights . :)
http://insightsonindia.com/2013/...
All the best :)
9.5k Views · View Upvotes
Abhishek Kumar Verma
Abhishek Kumar Verma, former studying
Written 10d ago
For one should be good in writing skills , one should be very good in reading too.

To produce precise and relevant answers , one must be thorough with the content.

I tried my level best to be 100% correct and accurate to all the points i will be mentioning.

I assume that you are aware which newspapers and magazines you have to read.

The civil services main exam consists of descriptive type of questions. It focusses on testing the candidate on various levels. The time limit for the essay paper is 3 hrs without a word limit, but for the optional paper, there are questions with specific word limit like 250words in optional subjects and 250 words, 150 words and 20 words in general studies. The candidate then has to prepare himself to answer all typesof questions. The most important thing to be kept in mind is the time constraint. Therefore it becomes necessary to answer these questions quickly and effectively andin minimum words.One common doubt that students have is with regard to the style of answering questions, whether to adopt the paragraph or the point style of answering questions. Though there is no set rule, it is wise to adopt a style depending onthe question asked. If the question says to discuss, analyse or critically examine, it would be betterto answer the question theparagraph format. On the other hand, if the question asks you to list the advantages or give reasons for/ against etc., itis better to go in for the point format of answering.

STYLE OF ANSWERING QUESTIONS:

For this it is very importantto understand the questionfirst. Depending on what the question is, whether one is asked to "discuss","elucidate","explain","critically Appreciate" or "give reasons for and against", the answer should be written Accordingly because it is only through the examinee's style of answering questions that one can assess his or her originality of thought and analytical abilities. The question should be read properly, in fact the question paper should be read thoroughly in the first five or ten minutes of the exam and then one should decide on the questions which are to be answered first. Time should also be given to frame the answer so that there is no confusion later on.A good way to write effective and precise answers is to pracise writing out answers. our answers should present the facts and concepts in an interesting way and should never read like a passage from a book. It is best to use simple English and avoid flowy and decorative langauage wichtakes our attention away from the original facts and our opinions about a given topic. Making a practice ofwriting out answers is especially useful in managing the time limit set for the exam and to write the best possible answer in the allotted timeIt not only improves one's style of expression, but also one gets used to the time and word limits.

HOW TO WRITE A GOOD ANSWER:

It is just not enough to know all the facts and information but the most important thing to be kept in mind is to write an answer which has a clear and a logical frame, which presents information in a clear and concise manner, which does not contain any irrelevant or piling up of information, which is interesting and able to hold one's http://attention.So the next logical step is to know how to write a good answer. The first step is to prepare the framework where one can list all ideas, thoughts and facts and write them down. It is important to adopt an answering style which is natural, original and to the point. Emphasisshould be given to the kindof language used, one which is simple and clear without unnecessary use of nouns and verbs. Use ofarchaic and fancy words or language should be avoided at all costs. Care should be taken to avoid grammatical mistakes which will give a negative opinion however good the answer may be. Last but not the least, it is very important to have a good and a legible handwriting.

HOW TO ANSWER THE EFFECTIVE PART OF THE QUESTION:

Everyone repeatedly talks about the effective part of the question. This is different from the Introduction, Body and Conclusion of any answer which is its structure. The effective part means whichangle or perspectivedo they wish the answers to be seen. The facts remain the same but the presentation differs. Soenumeratemeans represent in numbers andviewsmeans your opinion on those very numbers or facts. For example in enumerate the population ratio you give data like 93 females per 100 males. But in views you write that - The man woman ratio needs to be the same for which we need to take care of the girl child etc etc.We willexplain to you the meaning and application of some of the terms that appear repeatedly in questions in the IAS mainsexam. We rae not going by facts and the sentences may be funny at times. We are simply trying to drive the point home.

Enumerate: Simply list the points aboutthe topic and don't give detailed explaination. "The population ratio of India is 93 females per 100 males".

Narrate:'Early to late' this is how narration occurs. So, temporal (time related) sequencing is critical. You can even predict the course in future if asked."

The Sex Ratio in India was okay till the time of Independence, but has been against women sincethen. In ancient times there seemed to be more females than males as males seemed to have more than one wife each. With growing say of women more and more women and girl children will be taken care of and so we will perhaps go backto having more females ascompared to men."

Define:This simply means write the definition. A bit of memory helps here as you should try to reproduce verbatim and at least include all possible keywords and phrases which you know are essential parts of that particular definition."Population Ratio is the sex ratio or the ratio of males to females in a population. Sex Ratio is a term used to define the number of females per 1000 males."

Evaluate / Assess / Examine:Detailed explanations are required. Write in details whatever you know, inlude one to two lines of introduction followed by three to four lines in favourand three to four lines against the given topic. One to two lines of implications if any, and then limitations of the concepts and finally the conclusion in two to three lines needs to be added."The human sex ratio, is defined in terms of the number of males per 100 females which varies greatly between countries and regions. The biologicalnorm is for the sex ratio at birth to be about 105 more or less everywhere - meaning just over 51% of births are boys and just under 49% are girls...."

Opinion / Comment / Views:Whenever your opinion is asked, it should be full of optimism and your answer should be full of zeal and enthusiasm. Give constructive opinions with optimistic, future oriented and progressive ideas. However your opinions should be largely acceptable. "With India's growing economy, gender equality and improving health facilites we are sureto have a better sex ratio."

Purpose / Goal / Objective / Target:What is to be achieved, what is the purpose, the goal, the objectives or the targets? "India needs to control its population but at the same time needs to bring a balance in the population ratio. A balanced ratio reflects the progress and future of a country."

Analyse:When it comes to analyse, it is the same as evaluation, assessment or examination plus your opinion is also needed here. So, once you give your opinion it means you are interpreting the event according to your knowledge apart from detailed explanations."

The human sex ratio, is defined in terms of the number of males per 100 females which varies greatly between countries and regions. The biologicalnorm is for the sex ratio at birth to be about 105 more or less everywhere - meaning just over 51% of births are boys and just under 49% are girls...... andwith India's growing economy, gender equality and improving health facilites we are sure to have a better sex ratio."

Discuss:A frequently used term, it means you can write whatever you know but themost important thing is to write as if you are talking to the examiner. A differing opinion can be used. "Surely India needs to do something to balance the sex ratio. We should do extra policing and stop clinics from doing sex determination...."

Describe:This is the easiest thing to do and just theoretical knowledge is required here. You have to write basically its parts, what it is made up of, constituents, characteristics and attributes. "Population Ratio is the sex ratio or theratio of males to females in a population. It is the number of males per 100 females. Advanced countries have a sex ratio around 100:97 but India has 100:106....."

Critically:An important term and a favourite of UPSC. Whenever it is asking Critically Examine, Critically Comment or Critically Analyse just remember that you have towrite both pros and cons and give a fair, unbiased orvalue loaded judgement. Itshould always give a feeling of closure."Increasing the women population may increase the number of dependants in a family in rural India and for a while it may be counter productive but as more girls get educated they will find jobs and support their families. Alsoeduacting a girl will only lead to increased level of education in the next generation of the family asshe will make sure all her children go to school."

Elucidate / Elaborate / Expand / Exemplify:These are more or less similar words but not exactly the same. Elucidate means make it clear with examples to make it clear. Elaborate and Expand mean detailedexplanations. Exemplify means - give a typical example of that particular category. Please include contemporary affairs, connections or current affairs. "Kerala with 1084 females for every 1000 males has the highest sex ratio because of high levels of education whereas the union territoryof Chandigarh has only 818 females for every 1000males due to the gender bias in Punjab and Haryana. Since more states are like chandigarh the overall India ratio is 940 females/1000 males. "

Implications / Consequences / Outcomes / Results:Write about the possible scenario or impact of the event in question. " Due to better health facilities and reach of education the Indian sex ratio has shownmajor signs of improvement in the last 10years. From a small number of 933 in 2001, the bar has been raised to 940 in the 2011 Census of India."

Contrast / Distinguish:It means write differences not similarities. You can write similarities as well asdifferences if asked to Compare and Contrast."Kerala with 1084 females for every 1000 males has the highest sex ratio because of high levels of education whereas the union territory of Chandigarh has only 818 females for every 1000 males."

Significance / Importance:What happens because it exists or what happen if it doesn't exist. "Sex Ratio is a great source to find the equality of males and females in a society at a given period of time."

Justify / Advocate:Here you have to argue in favour of and write favourable comments as far as reasonably possible."More men per women is actually a good thing as women are known to live longer than men and as India develops we are sureto catch up. We will not have the problem of missing men any time soon like Russia has with sex ratio of 100:45.

"Illustrate:Use examples; data, diagrams and charts to make it clearer.

I hope this helps .

Comments and suggestions will be highly appreciated.
474 Views · View Upvotes
Kironmoyee Baruah
Kironmoyee Baruah, former English Teacher (2013-2016)
Written 1 Jan
Its good to see your seriousness regarding the exam. Keep this spirit up till the time of exam!

See,to improve your writing skills,you should read books,newspapers and magazines.When you read articles,you'll come across many new words and expressions,phrases and idioms and you'll also get to know on how you should use them in sentences.

While you are reading,jot down the new words that you come across on a paper and write down their meaning.Keep revising these words.

Always keep two things in mind-

1) Hard work is the only ladder to success.

2) Practice makes a man perfect.

Also, keep practicing and solving the previous years’ question papers. Just keep doing hard work and I am sure you'll succeed one day!

Cheers!
369 Views · Answer requested by Akshay Parihar
Jayasimha Nanubala
Jayasimha Nanubala, worked at Tata Consultancy Services
Written 20 Jan 2015
First of all if you understand /think why  UPSC mains exam is conducted in that particular pattern, then it will become easy for you to get an idea for improving your writing skills. 
Let us understand  the pattern of the mains exam.. 
You have four GS PAPERS AND One Optional(And Of course you have qualificational papers) , and you have to answer 20-25 Qns in some 300-400 words for 250 marks within Three Hours.
So the specific pattern is introduced or conducted because it will test your skills whether you match the requirements of a true bureaucrat or not. Did you keenly  observe the key words that you find in mains Qns like EVALUATE, CRITICALLY EXAMINE, COMMENT, ELABORATE etc. They hold very important role for your answer. To cut short your answer should be pin point to The Qn asked. 
Have you ever observed the following sinerios 

A. 
Whenever some natural calamity occurs in any part of the country, then immediately the corresponding district Collector is asked to submit the report on the loss that occurred, Recovery measures that have to be implemented to get the situation back and how many days would it take to recover from the situation..  All this has to be done within some specified time (You might have observed that CMs of that corresponding state asking collector to submit the report in one week or so) 

So you can relate why you are asked to EVALUATE, EXAMINE etc in the exam that too in 300 400 words. It is because you should know how to answer in specific situations based on the requirements in specified TIME and in short answers .So you should know How to handle pressure and submit report accurately and Crisply . (Politicians will not have patience to read all the info.. They want what to do part.. Thats it :P) 

B. 
If you observe committes (Constituted by parliament or any Gov Body) constituting of IAS officers which recommends/Gives Reports on various issues of the nation, you will understand why The CRITICALLY EXAMINE, COMMENT key words are IMPORTANT in the manins Qns. 

If the committee has to give recommendations for eg like UPSC CSE prelims issue, then the members will diplomatically analyse the existing situation and gives their OPINIONS which are called Recommendations. 
If the committee is Constituted let us say regarding the Ongoing ORDINANCE BILL then the members will CRITICALLY EXAMINE the situation from SOCIO ECONOMIC POLITICAL HUMAN angles and just Submits their Report. Based on the report The Gov will take the decision. 
Like wise if you observe there are many situations where Beaurocrats have to use that answer writing skill. 
So the point is if you understand this you will have more clarity and enthusiasm to develop the skill. 

Now let us DISCUSS HOW TO PART?? 
practice.. Practice.. PRACTICE.. There is no other way to improve this skill no matter How talented you are if you don't practice more and more no of Qns and answers then you will not succeed in this exam. 
AA. 
As already said (anonymous)  INSIGHTS Alone helps you to improve your writing skills if you devotionally practice the Qns in that site. They almost have the similatiry with the Mains Pattern of UPSC.. So start practicing Four Five Qns in the specified No of Words and time. It is okay if you exceed words in the beginning but maintain the Time limit. 

B. 
Observe the articles written by SENIOR GOV/IAS /IPS OFFICERS.. In YOJANA, HINDU EDITIOAL and in other magazines whatever you follow .. That is What the Examiner [(Examiner-{One who formulated Qn and someone Who is Going to Correct your Answer; Both are also  the Senior IAS/IPS/Gov officers)] wants from you. You should put your OWN OPINION /EXAMINED REPORT /EVALUATION / in your words in that particular pattern. Get that Grip by practicing, keeping the purpose of the Qn in mind. 
C. 
Save all your answers in a notebook or any softcopy form. And at the end of every week review your answers, you will awe struck by looking at your improvement. Then start showing your answers to some mentor or discuss them with your friends, very soon you will improve your writing skills. 

D. 
You  yourself write some analysis on burning issues before reading them in news paper and then check how the same news is covered by a senior officer in the News paper /Magazine. Find the differences and improve those areas. 

E. Apart from them start writing a Blog/Dairy/Short stories/ Answers on QUORA :P. 

If you keep all these points in mind and practice.. Practice.. PRACTICE..  YOU will surely come out with flying colors. 
All the Best.
6.3k Views · View Upvotes
Amar Singh
Amar Singh, Coder by profession and writer by heart (Stepping towards improvement).
Written 11 Aug 2015
The same Question asked by  number of UPSC Aspirants and no doubt , it is one of most Prominent Question regarding UPSC mains. I would like to sum-up my answer in few point-
1- First you have to Read , here reading means not simply reading ,reading with intellect  , think, analyse and develop your point  about what you have red.
2-After Reading take a copy and pen and write it down , what exactly  you think not bookies opinion here the thing which matters a lot is your  Opinion  about the subject.
3-If somehow possible try to check you ans. to seniors. through this you are able to know your mistake.
4- Try to Discuss topic/Subject through discussion by this you are able to know different view point of the same subject.
5-Last but not least , try to write  your thought in simple and lucid manner not complex  one .
because the main aim of writing is to Express your view point which is understandable for each and everyone not only selected peer or groups.
 All The best .
4.5k Views · View Upvotes
Vincent Van Ross
Vincent Van Ross, former Freelancer writer, author, poet and photographer
Written 1 Dec 2016
The only way to learn how to swim is to take the plunge. No amount of theoretical coaching will help that much in the end.

So, if you want to improve your writing skills, start writing. Keep writing and do a lot of writing. If you know someone who is good at writing, take a couple of samples of your writing to that person and have it reviewed. That person might be able to give you some tips and suggest corrections from time to time. So, you would also be able to keep tabs on your progress.

Improving writing skills is a never-ending process because there is nothing called a last word in writing. Once you develop good writing skills it would be useful not only for UPSC but for all spheres of your life.
433 Views · View Upvotes
Stan Hayward
Stan Hayward, Film/TV/Book writer. Websites www.stanhayward.com, www.henryscat.com
Updated 16 Sep 2015
One simple and basic rule for improving ones writing is to learn Precis writing
precis writing - Google Search

Also check my website at
MakeMovies Database
Writing links
5.3k Views · View Upvotes
Jeevan Kumar
Jeevan Kumar, Assistant Editor at Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India
Written 10d ago
This question is already answered by several experts. However, I will try to summerise some important tips.

UPSC doesn't require you to be an English language expert. So don't try to overlearn. Developing basic language skills is enough.
If you are beginning from scratch, try to learn basic grammar. (A book by Wren & Martin is useful)
Read the Hindu editorials for learning relevant vocabulary. These articles also help you developing a balanced opinion on issues.
More than your language skills, your understanding of various issues and your way of expression will matter in UPSC exam. Good command over subject and basic writing skills is what you need.
Start answer writing. Keep writing until it gets better. You can show your articles to friends and ask their opinion.
Keep your practice notebooks with you. After a period, compare your old answers with new ones. You can observe the improvement. This motivates you to write more.
Join a test series. Write as many answers as you can. Don't worry about results in the beginning itself. Just keep writing, you will improve.
Read interviews of toppers. Observe their tips and follow the ones that suit you.
There are too many online sources for UPSC preparation. Follow any of their strategy, if you like.
Improve your handwriting. It gets better with practice.
95 Views
Nandan Choksi
Nandan Choksi, Student & Teacher of Communication Skills
Written 16 Sep 2015
You need to analyze, evaluate, and personalize. This means, when you write, you should be sure that you are answering the correct question. So, if the question is about cleaning the Ganga, you must approach the question carefully. Don't make any assumptions. For example, don't assume the question refers to the entire river. You can focus on a certain section -- the section that you know best. If you live in Allahabad, then focus on that part. If you are in Bengal then focus on that part. 

Explain why it is necessary, and the way you would do it. Be confident. Your answer will never be the perfect solution. But it should make sense. And it should seem unbiased. So you should look at least one objection to your solution and explain why that objection is wrong.

End by giving a recommendation that comes from your heart. But it should flow with the rest of your answer.

Good Luck!
4.1k Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by Himanshu Gaurav
Trilok Sharma
Trilok Sharma, Trying to communicate well.
Written 26 Mar 2015
Write to start blogs or articles whatever you like. First you need to practice for writing.
Best place for writing will be Quora where you don't have to think that what should I write now. Just see questions and answer them if they are from your domain. And keep it in your mind that you know something and quora has everything so just Start now.
3.7k Views · View Upvotes
Anonymous
Anonymous
Written 20 Jan 2015
By writing answer.

No matter how much you plan, you'll stumble in mains  if you have not practiced enough (personal experience).

Insightsonindia is one great place to practice. 1 ans/day will alone be sufficient for now. (increase numbers after prelims)

You'll learn more through responses of others( and this will motivate you as well) than planning in blind. Plus once you have written an answer, good chances are that your research( before writing answer) will make that topic clear in your mind.
3.7k Views · View Upvotes
Muazzam Hossain
Muazzam Hossain
Written 4 Feb 2015
Good answers generally follow a simple pattern

A heading that states what you are addressing
Body text that states what you have to say
A summary that ends it

Don't drift off on incidental aspects that do not add to your answer
Use links if they are really relevant
Use anecdotes if they are short and to the point
Be funny if it is in context with the answer

Don't use long paragraphs
Don't say the obvious
Don't repeat what someone else has said unless you can add to it

Don't get too technical unless the question specifically requires it
Don't give more examples than are necessary to make your point

In summary, follow journalistic patterns of getting attention, making your point, and summing it up. custom essay writing services. http://www.topessaywriting.net/c...
4.3k Views · View Upvotes
Charlie Noak
Charlie Noak, Former fighter pilot and physician, now disabled. I am starting my fifth novel.
Written 24 Nov 2016
Coaching, and much practice. You will need a thick skin, and no emotion.
264 Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by 1 person
Tanya Tamrakar
Tanya Tamrakar, Knowledge seeker and a positive helper. :)
Written 30 Jul 2016
The first and foremost suggestion I suggest to public is to surround yourself with English.

Surrounding yourself with English makes you gain more vocabulary and different ways to express yourself. For this,

>subscribe a English newspaper, watch English programs. Don't only listen them, try to understand their way of using vocabulary.

>Learn new word every day.

>read more and more to make your vocabulary strong.

>try speaking in English. Wherever you find difficulty in expressing yourself, lay stress on your grammar.

>most importantly, practice writing in English concentrating more on English grammar.

Following above tips can help your UPSC written section. I hoped you liked it and got it. :)
1k Views · View Upvotes · Answer requested by Abhi Upp
Montana Nevada
Montana Nevada
Written 15d ago
The best way is to read Quora daily one hour or so and follow it for few weeks and after that try to write some answers for easy questions

Try to read daily newspaper for 20 minutes especially Deccan chronicle or Times of India and especially at this point everyone says to read Hindu but for eassy and all try other than The Hindu

Within one month u will get how to write an essay Just try dissertation writing service and give it to any professional who will help you.

It's better if u start a novel just one r two to have a flow and it will useful while writing

thank you.